.\" Copyright Vespa.ai. Licensed under the terms of the Apache 2.0 license. See LICENSE in the project root.
.TH VESPASTAT 1 2008-08-29 "Vespa" "Vespa Documentation"
.SH NAME
vespastat \- Shows status of a given document in Vespa
.SH SYNPOSIS
.B vespastat
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] <\fIDOCUMENT IDENTIFIER\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This utility makes it possible to check internal information about all
instances of given document that still exist in Vespa. It is mostly used during
debugging.
.PP
It tells you what storage nodes currently has instances of the document, and
also informs about older instances of documents that still exist as the space
has not yet been reclaimed.
.PP
The results shows a sorted list of all instances found. The list should be
sorted by timestamps, with highest timestamp (newest in time) appearing on
top of the list. Only the entries with the freshest timestamp should be
used during normal operations. Though, if not all the nodes with copies has
the newest instance (highest timestamp), the file the document is in is not
in sync.
.PP
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
Short options can not currently be concatenated together.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Shows a short syntax reminder.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-route\fR
Send the stat to the following messagebus route. The default should be fine in
most cases, but in cases where you have multiple storage clusters, you might
want to send it to a specific cluster.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Haakon Humberset.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Full documentation for Vespa
